# Predicting-the-stock-price-using-machine-learning

Abstract 

Predicting the stock price in the financial market has not been an easy task to do, due to the fact that financial time series are naturally non-stationary and chaotic. To predict the accurate stock price values is very hard because of its nature of being volatile and chaotic. The introduction of machine learning and computational capabilities have proved to be efficient in predicting the stock price. The goal of using machine learning algorithms is to read the given market data, design an intelligent model fitting to the non-linear models from the data set and predict the future tendencies of the stock price movement. In this research project only two machine learning algorithms are used namely: the K-nearest neighbour and the Random forest and they are evaluated using the accuracy score. The are used to predict the stock price of the listed companies which are Apple,Ford, Mastercard and Exxonemobile. The results demostrated that the K-nearest neighbour outcompeted the Random forest with a slight difference between them.

Chapter 1 

Introduction 1.1 

Background of the study 

Predicting the tendency of the stock market is challenging, due to the dependence of many variables that influence the market value, such as global economic events, catastrophes, war, political conditions, which affect investors’ sentiments, etc. This dependency results in random fluctuations of the stock price, adapting to rapid changes. In general, stock market series are dynamic, non-parametric, chaotic, and noisy. Hence, stock market movement is regarded to be a random process with more apparent variations for short time frames (Khaidem et al., 2016). 

To predict the accurate stock price values is very hard because of its nature of being volatile and chaotic. For analysis of the stock market, huge amounts of data are used, which leads to non-linear representations due to the effects of random fluctuation as the stock market is time-independent. Thus, strategies to predict stock values in advance by analysing the pattern over the last several years could show to be quite valuable for making stock market moves in order to maximise profits and avoid losses (Vijh et al., 2020). The following are some of the most notable approaches for predicting stock price behav ior: (1) time series forecasting, (2) technical analysis (3) data mining and machine learning are two of the most recent developments in the field of artificial intelligence (Hellstrom and ¨ Holmstrom¨ , 1998) and (4) using differential equations to model and predict stock volatility (Saha et al., 2013). Because the data sets connected with stock market prediction problems are too large to be handled by non-data mining approaches, this research project focuses mostly on the third approach (Widom, 1995). The introduction of machine learning and computational capabilities have proved to be ef ficient in predicting the stock price. The goal of using machine learning algorithms is to read the given market data, design an intelligent model fitting to the non-linear models from the data set and predict the future tendencies of the stock price movement. According to Khaidem et al. (2016), stock prediction provides better performance when considered as a classification problem rather than a regression problem.

A successful stock forecast can result in large gains for both the seller and the broker.It is frequently stated that prediction is chaotic rather than random, implying that it can be predicted by carefully examining the history of the individual stock market (Parmar et al., 2018). Many
algorithms have been utilized in machine learning, which has becoming increasingly popu lar such as support vector machines (SVM), random forest (RF), linear regression, logistic regression, neural network, naive bayesian classifier, etc. 

The dataset used in machine learning is important; it should be as concrete as possible because even minor changes in the data can result in significant changes in the results (Raza, 2017). According to Kumar and Thenmozhi (2006), random forest and support vector machines are examples of machine learning techniques that have been successful recently. This is because they ignore the issue of modeling the underlying distribution and instead concentrate on producing precise predictions for some variables given other factors. In this project, we will use the random forest and the k-nearest neighbours algorithm, but we will implement other algorithms if time allows us since we are given a duration of time to complete this project. Random forest method was developed by Breiman (2001), is a machine learning technique under supervised learning that operates by constructing multiple decision trees.

The random forest makes the final choice, which is based on the majority of the trees. For classification and regression problems, the random forest is utilized, however, in this research project, we focus on the random forest regression, since we are dealing with continuous stock price. The k-nearest neighbours algorithm was developed by Fix and Hodges Jr (1952). It is a lazy learning algorithm that is non-parametric and efficient. This is a supervised machine learning approach that can be used to predict classification and regression problems. K-nearest neighbours selects k records from the training data set that are closest to an unknown record in order to forecast a class label for it. The final result is calculated using the average of the majority vote among the k records chosen.
